Introduction
============

The third and last **Pillar of Object-Oriented Programming** that we’ll
explore is **polymorphism**.

Polymorphism
------------

From our `glossary <../../glossary/>`__:

.. raw:: html

   <aside class="aside-definition">

**polymorphism**: An object-oriented mechanism that allows for objects
of different types to be used in the same way.

.. raw:: html

   </aside>

We’ve already encountered polymorphism made possible by inheritance.
Recall the example from the `lesson on
inheritance <../classes-and-objects-inheritance/#inheritance-in-java>`__
where we defined a ``Cat`` class, with subclasses ``HouseCat`` and
``Tiger``.

Suppose we had a ``CatOwner`` like below.

.. code:: java

   public class CatOwner
   {
       private Cat pet;

       public CatOwner(Cat pet) {
           this.pet = pet;
       }

       public void feedTheCat() {

           // ...code to prepare the cat's meal...

           pet.eat();
       }
   }

The method ``feedTheCat`` uses the field ``pet``, which is of type
``Cat``, but since a ``HouseCat`` *is a* ``Cat`` via inheritance, it is
perfectly acceptable to use an instance of ``HouseCat`` to fill the
``pet`` field.

.. code:: java

   HouseCat suki = new HouseCat("Suki", 12);
   CatOwner Annie = new CatOwner (suki);

   Annie.feedTheCat();

Similarly, ``feedTheCat`` can accept ``Tiger`` instances as well. This
is because the only thing that the method requires is that the input
parameter has the methods defined within ``Cat``, and via inheritance,
both of the subclasses satisfy this requirement. This is an example of
polymorphism.

There’s one more object-oriented mechanism that empowers us to code in a
polymorphic way: the interface.

Interfaces
----------

An **interface** is a formal construction within Java that allows us to
create a contract that classes can choose to fulfill. A Java interface
may contain:

-  Constants (that is, ``static final`` fields)
-  Method signatures
-  Static methods
-  Default methods

.. raw:: html

   <aside class="aside-note">

An interface may also contain “nested types”, which we won’t discuss in
this class.

.. raw:: html

   </aside>

The most useful aspect of interfaces is to specify method signatures.
Recall that a method signature includes the name, parameters, and return
type of a method, but no body. From the list above, we’ve seen every
type of member except for **default methods**. We’ll describe these
briefly near the end of this lesson.

Here’s a simple example:

.. code:: java

   public interface Feedable
   {

       void eat();

   }

And here are some observations:

-  An interface is defined similarly to an abstract class, but using the
   keyword ``interface``. (We’ll discuss similarities and differences
   between interfaces and abstract classes below.)
-  ``eat`` only has a signature. We are not allowed to provide a body
   for methods defined in interfaces.
-  ``eat`` does not have an access modifier. Interface members are
   always ``public``, and while we may use the ``public`` modifier, it’s
   unnecessary. An interface method may not have an access modifier that
   is more restrictive than ``public``.
-  The interface itself is declared ``public``, which means any other
   class may use it. We may also leave off ``public``, making the
   interface package-private, or usable only within the same package.
-  The name is indicative of the behavior that the interface is intended
   to describe. While this is only a convention, most interfaces have
   names that are adjectives. Whatever you do, use meaningful names!

The purpose of an interface is to define a contract that classes may
choose to uphold. In doing so, we say that they “*implement* the
interface”. The syntax for implementation is similar to that for
inheritance. Here’s how we can use the ``Feedable`` interface in
defining our ``Cat`` class.

.. code:: java

   public class Cat implements Feedable
   {

       @Override
       public void eat()
       {
           // method implementation
       }

       // ...rest of the class definition...

   }

Since we’ve declared that ``Cat`` implements ``Feedable``, we have to
provide an implementation for the ``eat`` method, with the signature as
specified in the interface definition. Note that we use ``@Override``,
just as we do when overriding an inherited method in a subclass. Like
that situation, using ``@Override`` when implementing methods defined in
an interface will enable the compiler to check that your method
signature does indeed match that of the interface.

.. raw:: html

   <aside class="aside-note">

You may both extend a class and implement an interface at the same time:

.. code:: java

   public class MyClass extends MySubclass implements MyInterface
   {
       // ...code...
   }

.. raw:: html

   </aside>

As with classes, interfaces define a type that can be used when
declaring fields, parameters, and local variables.

Using an interface allows us to relax the requirements on our code
elsewhere, thus making it more extensible and adaptable. For example,
here’s how we might modify ``CatOwner``:

.. code:: java

   public class CatOwner
   {
       private Feedable pet;

       public CatOwner(Feedable pet) {
           this.pet = pet;
       }

       public  void feedTheCat() {

           // ...code to prepare the cat's meal...

           pet.eat();
       }
   }

Note that we’ve declared the property ``pet`` to be of type
``Feedable``. This class assumes that the only behavior of ``pet`` that
we’ll need within the class is the ability to ``eat``. But if that’s all
we need, then we should relax the requirements on the ``pet`` property
as much as possible. In fact, there’s nothing specific about cats in
this class, so we might make our code a step more abstract and flexible
by doing the following:

.. code:: java

   public class PetOwner
   {
       private Feedable pet;

       public PetOwner(Feedable pet) {
           this.pet = pet;
       }

       public void feedThePet() {

           // ...code to prepare the pet's meal...

           pet.eat();
       }
   }

   public class CatOwner extends PetOwner
   {
       // code that requires Cat-specific behavior
   }

We’ve created a ``PetOwner`` class that encapsulates the behavior that
could apply to any pet (any ``Feedable``, actually), and have
``CatOwner`` extend ``PetOwner``. This allows other classes to extend
``PetOwner`` to make, say, a ``DogOwner`` that knows how to play fetch
with their pet, or a ``HorseOwner`` that knows how to ride their pet. It
also reduces the dependency of the ``feedThePet`` method on the specific
type of pet, since it doesn’t need to care.

To use this new class design, we can revise the sample code from above
as follows:

.. code:: java

   HouseCat suki = new HouseCat("Suki", 12);
   CatOwner Annie = new CatOwner(suki);

   Annie.feedThePet();

While the code usage here remains unchanged except for changing the
method name from ``feedTheCat`` to the more generic ``feedThePet``, the
opportunities for using the classes we’ve built are much wider since the
defined classes are no longer dependent on the specific ``Cat`` class.
Also notice that we’ve used the object ``suki`` in a polymorphic way,
creating it as a ``HouseCat``, but using it as a ``Feedable`` within the
``CatOwner`` class.

.. raw:: html

   <aside class="aside-note">

Like inheritance, interfaces enable polymorphic usage of objects. We can
create an object, and then use it in different contexts based on any
interfaces that it implements.

.. raw:: html

   </aside>

One final note before discussing how we might use interfaces in our
code: *Interfaces may not be created like objects are, with* ``new``.
You may implement an interface, or declare variables and parameters as
interface types. You can not, however, create an instance of an
interface.

Interfaces In The Wild
----------------------

The most immediate situations that you’ll encounter in which you’ll want
to use interfaces are when working with interfaces and classes that are
part of Java. Here are just a few.

Comparable<T>
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Purpose**: A class implements ``Comparable<T>`` in order to allow
comparison - in a “greater than” and “less than” sense - to another
instance of the class. This is a “parameterized” interface, which means
that when using it you need to specify the class that it will be
comparing. For example, ``Comparable<Job>`` would compare ``Job``
objects.

**Important Methods**: ``compareTo(T)``

`Comparable<T>
Documentation <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Comparable.html>`__

Comparator<T>
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Purpose**: Compare two objects of a given class. When wanting to
compare objects from a given class, you can create several different
``Comparator`` classes to allow different types of comparison and
ordering. The class that you want to compare objects of *does not*
implement the interface itself.

**Important Methods**: ``compare(T, T)``

`Comparator<T>
Documentation <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Comparator.html>`__

This interface can be used to determine, given two objects of the given
type, which one is “greater” than the other. It is also used by
collections such as
`ArrayList <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ArrayList.html>`__
to sort its contents with the
`sort <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ArrayList.html#sort-java.util.Comparator->`__
method.

.. raw:: html

   <aside class="aside-note">

For more on the differences between ``Comparator`` and ``Comparable``,
see `this
article <https://www.javatpoint.com/difference-between-comparable-and-comparator>`__.

.. raw:: html

   </aside>

Iterable<T>
~~~~~~~~~~~

**Purpose**: Enable iteration over a collection of objects using a
for-each loop

**Important Methods**: ``iterator()``

`Iterable<T>
Documentation <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Iterable.html>`__

This interface is implemented by the ``ArrayList<T>`` class, which we’ve
been using throughout this course.

**Example**

.. code:: java

   Iterable<String> collection = new ArrayList<>();

   // Add items to the collection

   for (String item : collection) {
       // do something with each item
   }

List<T>
~~~~~~~

**Purpose**: Enable access to objects in a collection by index. In other
words, enable ordered collections.

**Important Methods**: ``add(int, T)``, ``get(int)``, ``indexOf(T)``

`List<T>
Documentation <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/List.html>`__

This interface is also implemented by the ``ArrayList<T>`` class, which
we’ve been using throughout this course. In fact, ``List<T>`` extends
``Iterable<T>``. *An interface may extend another interface*, in the
same way that classes may extend each other.

**Example**

.. code:: java

   List<String> collection = new ArrayList<>();

   // Add items to the collection

   // Get the first item
   String firstItem = collection.get(0);

Map<K, V>
~~~~~~~~~

**Purpose**: Represent a collection of key/value pairs.

**Important Methods**: ``get(K)``, ``containsKey(K)``, ``put(K, V)``

`Map<K, V>
Documentation <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Map.html>`__

This interface is implemented by the ``HashMap<K, V>`` class, which
we’ve been using throughout this course.

**Example**

.. code:: java

   Map<String, String> collection = new HashMap<>();

   // Add items to the collection

   // Get item with key "hello"
   String hello = collection.get("hello");

Default Methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We mentioned above that we would introduce **default methods**, so let’s
do that now. A default method has a body. In other words, it is a
fully-formed method. It is preceded with the ``default`` keyword, and it
may be overridden by classes implementing the interface.

.. code:: java

   public interface MyInterface {

       void someMethod();

       default void someOtherMethod() {
           // ...code goes here...
       }

   }

Default methods were added to Java 8 (the most recent version of Java),
and thus are relatively new. Their intended purpose is to allow
programmers to add a method to an interface that has already been
released, while not forcing those already using the interface to add new
code to their classes. You should avoid using default methods in all
other situations other than the one described here. *Do not use default
methods when writing a new interface.*

Comparison to Abstract Classes
------------------------------

We mentioned above that interfaces share some characteristics with
abstract classes. Recall that an abstract class is one declared with the
``abstract`` keyword. You may not create an object from an abstract
class, and like an interface, an abstract class is allowed to contain
methods that only have signatures (that is, they don’t have
implementation code).

The main differences between interfaces and abstract classes are: - You
*implement* an interface, while you *extend* an abstract class. The net
effect of this is that a class may implement interfaces while also
extending a class. Note that while you can implement *more than one*
interface, you can only extend *one* class. - Abstract classes may
contain non-constant fields, while interfaces may not. - Interfaces may
only contain implementation code inside of default or static methods,
thus they can’t contain methods that need to be shared by class
instances in the same way that abstract classes do. In particular, any
method that needs to use an instance property may not be part of an
interface, since interfaces don’t have instance properties. Unlike
interfaces, abstract classes may have methods which are not static or
default and which do have implementation code. - Abstract classes should
be used to collect and specify behavior by related classes, while an
interface should be used to specify related behaviors that may be common
across unrelated classes.

For example, we could implement ``Comparator`` in many ways, to sort a
wide variety of classes whose objects may be compared to one another:
``Date`` (compare by temporal order), ``Student`` (compare by GPA),
``Person`` (compare by age), ``City`` (compare by population). However,
it’s unlikely that these classes would have any implementable behavior
that would warrant that they have the same base class.

Benefits of Using Interfaces
----------------------------

Interfaces are great! Trust us, they really are. Once you get used to
them, you’ll begin to think more abstractly about which *behaviors* your
code requires rather than which *classes* your code requires. This means
you’ll be able to “code to interfaces” (an OOP principle) instead of
coding to classes, and your code will become more flexible and
extensible.

Here are a few benefits of using interfaces:

-  You can only extend one class, but you may implement many interfaces.
-  You can extend a class and implement an interface at the same time.
-  By declaring variables and parameters as interface types, you make
   your code useful for a much wider variety of situations.
-  When you declare properties and return types to be interface types,
   you decouple code using your classes from the actual class types you
   use. This means that you are free to change the specific
   implementation of your classes without affecting those using them.
   For example, if from a public method you returned an object of type
   ``Iterable<Job>`` then you would be free to change the method’s
   internal structure to use, say, a
   `HashSet <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/HashSet.html>`__
   instead of an
   `ArrayList <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ArrayList.html>`__.

Remember that you don’t need to start creating interfaces to use their
power! When working with collections, in particular, think about the
behaviors that your code requires, and declare variables and parameters
to be interface types if you only need to use specific behaviors such as
ordering or iteration.

References
----------

-  `Interfaces
   Tutorial <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/IandI/createinterface.html>`__
-  `Comparable
   Interface <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Comparable.html>`__
-  `Comparator
   Interface <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Comparator.html>`__
-  `Iterable
   Interface <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Iterable.html>`__
-  `List
   Interface <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/List.html>`__
-  `Map
   Interface <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Map.html>`__
