.. _tech-jobs-oo:

Assignment #2: Tech Jobs (Object-Oriented Edition)
===================================================

Introduction
------------

Your apprenticeship at LaunchCode is going well! Only a few weeks in and you’re
regularly making contributions to code that will eventually be used by all
LaunchCode staff.

Your last task was to get the prototype Tech Jobs app in good shape. Now it’s
time to advance the underlying structure of the program.

Your mentor on this project is Sally, one of the developers at LaunchCode. She
regularly mentors developers who are just getting started with their careers.

.. figure:: figures/LC-Sally.png
   :scale: 50%
   :alt: Sally's LaunchCode avatar.

She’s done some initial work on the project and left you some TODOs. After
seeing your strong work with your last project, Blake reported that you
performed well and learned quickly. Because of your success, he and Sally feel
comfortable assigning you to a set of tasks that are a notch up in difficulty.

Learning Objectives
--------------------

In this project, you’ll show that you can:

#. Read and understand code written by others.
#. Work with *objects* to encapsulate data and methods.
#. Work with model classes via a data access layer (in this case,
   ``JobData``).

TechJobs (Object-Oriented Edition)
-----------------------------------

Sally has gotten the ball rolling by adding a ``Job`` class, along with classes
to represent the individual properties of a job: ``Employer``, ``Location``,
``PositionType``, and ``CoreCompetency``.

She has also refactored the View and Controller
layers to use these new classes. Finally, she has modified the
``JobData`` class to properly create ``Job`` and related objects when
importing data from ``job_data.csv``.

As the team gets closer to hooking the app up to a database - and
abandoning the test data they’ve been using - they’ll want an easy way
to add new jobs via the user interface.

Your Assignment
---------------

You’ve been tasked with completing a feature that allows new ``Job``
objects to be created and added to the system. You’ll touch all layers
of the application, but you’ll be primarily working with model classes
to complete this feature.

Getting Started
----------------

#. Set up a local copy of the project: Visit the `repository
   page <https://github.com/LaunchCodeEducation/techjobs-oo>`__ for this
   project and fork the repository to create a copy under your own GitHub
   account.
#. Open IntelliJ (if IntelliJ is currently open, save your work, close it, and
   reopen it).
#. If the app opens up to an existing project, select *IntelliJ > Preferences >
   Appearance & Behavior > System Settings* and uncheck *Reopen last project on
   startup*. Close and Reopen IntelliJ.
#. From the “Welcome to IntelliJ” dialog box, select *Check out from Version
   Control > GitHub*.
#. Choose your fork from the repository dropdown, select the parent directory
   where you’d like to store your project, and hit *Clone*.
#. In the screens that follow:

   a. Choose *Create Project From Existing Sources* on the first pane.
   b. Select *Auto Import* in the Gradle configuration pane.
   c. Select defaults on all other panes

Go ahead and start up the application (via the Gradle pane, *Tasks >
Application > bootRun*), so you can refer to both the code as well as
the running app while we look at what’s in place already.

The Model
----------

The largest amount of new code is in the model. Open up the
``org.launchcode.models`` package and you’ll see several classes, some
of which you’ll work with directly, and some of which you won’t.

The Job Class
--------------

Working with data stored as strings in HashMaps and ArrayLists isn’t a
good long-term solution, for various reasons that we will discuss
momentarily. The ``Job`` class introduces an object-oriented design to
the application.

It contains all of the fields that you’ve grown used to while working on
TechJobs: ``name``, ``employer``, ``location``, ``coreCompetency``, and
``positionType``. There’s also an ``id`` field which will be used to
uniquely identify ``Job`` objects.

The main difference between the object representation of a job and the
string-based representation is that the values of ``employer``,
``location``, and the other non-ID fields are no longer strings, but
instead are classes of their own.

Job Fields
^^^^^^^^^^^

If you don’t have it open already, open the ``Job`` class. You’ll see
the following fields (among others):

.. sourcecode:: java
   :linenos:

   private String name;
   private Employer employer;
   private Location location;
   private PositionType positionType;
   private CoreCompetency coreCompetency;

Of these, only ``name`` is a string. Sally has created classes to
represent each of the other properties. Each of these classes –
``Employer``, ``Location``, ``CoreCompetency``, ``PositionType`` – have
``value`` and ``id`` fields.

If you look at the guts of any of these job property classes, you’ll see
that they each extend ``JobField``, and don’t have any additional
properties of their own. We’ll customize and add to these classes in a
future assignment, but for now we only need to work with their inherited
``value`` and ``id`` properties.

So, for example, if you had a ``Job`` instance, you could get the name
of the employer this way:

.. sourcecode:: java

   // job is an instance of Job
   String employerName = job.getEmployer().getValue();

Additionally, the ``toString()`` method of the ``JobField`` class (which
these other classes inherit) is set up to return the ``value`` field.
Thus, using one of these objects in a template, or in another string
context like ``System.out.println``, will print the ``value``.

.. sourcecode:: java

   // prints the name of the employer
   System.out.println(job.getEmployer);

Why do we go to all of this trouble, when we could store this
job-related data as strings? There are a couple of reasons.

Eliminate Duplication of Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In our application we’ll have multiple jobs that have the same value in
a given field. For example, there are multiple jobs with position type
“Web - Full Stack”, and for several employers, there are several jobs
with that employer. Were we to store the values of these fields as
strings directly within the ``Job`` class, these strings would be
repeated in several places across the application.

By using objects, we can have a single ``PositionType`` object with
value “Web - Full Stack”, and then have each job that wants to use that
position type hold onto a reference to the given object. Similarly, we
can have one ``Employer`` object for each employer.

Aside from reducing the amount of raw data / memory that the application
uses, this will allow data to be updated more easily and properly. If we
need to change the name of an employer (e.g. due to a typo, or a name
change at a company), we can change it in one place: the single
``Employer`` object that represents that employer.

Enable Extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While the four ``Job`` properties represented by objects will primarily
be used for their string values, it’s not hard to imagine that we would
want to add additional properties to them.

For example, it would be useful for an ``Employer`` object to have an
address, a primary contact, and a list of jobs available at that
employer.

For a ``Location`` object, it would be useful to have a list of zip
codes associated with that location, in order to determine which
location an employer or job is located in.

If we were to store these properties as strings, extending and modifying
this behavior would be much more complicated and difficult in the
future.

There’s one more class in ``models`` that we need to introduce.

JobFieldType
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``JobFieldType`` class is an enum that enables the view and
controller layers to easily ask for data related to a specific job
field, or to all fields.

The enum has the values ``EMPLOYER``, ``LOCATION``, ``POSITION_TYPE``,
``CORE_COMPETENCY``, and ``ALL``. These take the place of the “magic
strings” that we were using all across our code in the first two
iterations of TechJobs. Previously, we would find all employers this
way:

.. sourcecode:: java

   ArrayList<string> employers = JobData.findByColumnAndValue("employer", "LaunchCode");

Now, however, we can do this:

.. sourcecode:: java

   ArrayList<JobField> employers = jobData.findByColumnAndValue(JobFieldType.EMPLOYER, "LaunchCode");

By using enum values instead of strings, we eliminate the possibility of
runtime errors. In other words, the compiler will force us to use a
valid ``JobFieldType``, whereas if we had misspelled “employer” in the
first example, we wouldn’t have found out until running our code.

Many of the methods in ``JobData`` now work by taking in a
``JobFieldType`` parameter rather than a string.

We also use the ``JobFieldType`` values to render search and list
options in the view, and to collect these options in the controller
layer.

The Data Layer
---------------

JobData and JobDataImporter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this updated version, the data access functionality has been moved
into its own package, ``org.launchcode.models.data``. This is partly to
better organize our code as the application grows, and also to
anticipate the move to a database in the near future. Additionally,
we’ve moved the logic to import data from the CSV file into
``JobDataImporter``.

The ``JobData`` class has been refactored to work with ``Job`` objects,
and the objects that a ``Job`` has references to (``Employer``,
``Location``, etc), rather than strings. You won’t need to understand
the internals of how this works. Instead, you’ll need to understand how
to use the class.

Rather than having a collection of static methods, ``JobData`` now has
several instance methods, with usage outlined below. Each controller
already has a ``JobData`` object set up for you, named ``jobData``.

+----------------+---------------------+-------------------------------+
| Method         | Return Type         | Description                   |
+================+=====================+===============================+
| ``findById(int | ``Job``             | Find a job by its ID          |
| )``            |                     |                               |
+----------------+---------------------+-------------------------------+
| ``findByColumn | ``ArrayList<Job>``  | Find all jobs matching the    |
| AndValue(JobFi |                     | given string in the given     |
| eldType, Strin |                     | column/property               |
| g)``           |                     |                               |
+----------------+---------------------+-------------------------------+
| ``findByValue( | ``ArrayList<Job>``  | Find all jobs matching the    |
| String)``      |                     | given string in any fields    |
+----------------+---------------------+-------------------------------+

**Examples:**

.. sourcecode:: java
   :linenos:

   // Find the job with id 42
   Job someJob = jobData.findById(42);

   // Find all jobs at LaunchCode
   ArrayList<Job> jobsAtLaunchcode =
       jobData.findByColumnAndValue(JobFieldType.EMPLOYER, "LaunchCode");

   // Find all jobs involving Ruby
   ArrayList<Job> jobsInvolvingRuby = jobData.findByValue("ruby");

To work with the list of ``Job`` objects itself, you can do the
following:

.. sourcecode:: java
   :linenos:

   // Get the full list of jobs
   ArrayList<Job> allOfTheJobs = jobData.findAll();

   // add a new Job object to the list
   jobData.add(newJob);

Additionally, collections of classes that make up the individual
properties of a ``Job`` object – ``Employer``, ``Location``,
``CoreCompetency``, ``PositionType`` – are available as properties of
``JobData``. For example, all employers are contained in a property
called ``Employers``.

There are two methods that you might want to use here. Here they are:

.. sourcecode:: java
   :linenos:

   // Find the employer with id=7
   Employer anEmployer = jobData.getEmployers().findById(7);

   // Get all employers
   ArrayList<Employer> allEmployers = jobData.getEmployers().findAll();

Examples for locations, position types, and core competencies are
similar.

.. admonition:: Warning

   You should not try to create a new ``Job`` object with ``Employer``,
   ``Location``, etc. properties that don’t already exist. Our non-database
   system isn’t as robust as it will be shortly, and doing something like
   this might break it.

   When you create a new ``Job`` object for this assignment, you’ll always
   be doing so using existing employers, locations, etc.

The models.forms package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are two model classes within the ``org.launchcode.models.forms``
package. Open up ``SearchForm`` and you’ll see three fields near the
top:

.. sourcecode:: java
   :linenos:

   // The search options
   private JobFieldType[] fields = JobFieldType.values();

   // The selected search options
   private JobFieldType searchField = JobFieldType.ALL;

   // The search string
   private String keyword;

These fields represent the data associated with the search form. In
other words, each is necessary to display and process the form. If you
look within ``SearchController``, you’ll see that we use model binding
with a ``SearchForm`` object to process the form, and we pass a
``SearchForm`` object into the view to display the form.

We do this because there isn’t a natural model object to use with the
search form, but we’d like to have the benefits of model binding and
validation.

Similarly, ``JobForm`` contains (some of) the data needed to display and
process a form to create a new job. More info on this class is below.

Controllers
~~~~~~~~~~~

You won’t be working on search and list functionality in this
assignment, but you should know that Sally has refactored all of the
code in ``ListController`` and ``SearchController`` to use model
classes. While you won’t be working in these classes, you’ll likely
learn something new by reading that code, so we encourage you to dive
into those files.

There’s one new controller, ``JobController``, that you will work in to
enable full creation of a ``Job`` object, including all necessary
fields.

The View
~~~~~~~~

Previously-existing view templates are still in place, though they’ve
been refactored to use the new model structure.

There are two new view templates in ``resources/templates/``:
``job-detail.html`` and ``new-job.html``. You’ll be adding code to each
of these. The first will be used to display data associated with a
single job, while the second will display the form used to create a new
job.

Your Tasks
-----------

Once you understand the controllers and views that are already in place,
you’re ready to begin your work. In IntelliJ, select *View > Tool
Windows > TODO* to pop open a small pane at the bottom of the window.
This list is populated by any code comments that start with ``TODO``. In
particular, you’ll see your 6 tasks listed.

.. figure:: ../images/task-list-oo.png
   :alt: Task List

   Task List

As you work on your tasks, refer to the `demo
app <https://techjobs-oo.cfapps.io/>`__ to see how your application
should behave.

Display A Single Job
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Your first two tasks involve displaying data associated with a single
job. When you’re done, visiting the URL ``/job?id=X`` will display the
details of the job with an ``id`` equal to X.

Within the ``index`` handler method of ``JobController``, you should
retrieve the job with the given ID, and then pass it into the view.

Within the ``job-detail.html`` template you need to display the
properties of the job in a table.

Create New Jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Our ``JobController`` class and the ``new-job.html`` template is set up
to allow a user to create new jobs through the interface, but it isn’t
complete. Getting this to work comprises your next set of tasks.

First, you’ll need to work within ``JobForm`` to set up the properties
to allow for both form display and form submission. Sally has put in
place the code to display and process the ``name`` and the data
associated with an employer.

Notice that rather having a field for ``employer``, we have a field for
``employerId``.

.. sourcecode:: java

   @NotNull
   private int employerId;

In the user interface (that is, on the web page) we’ll only need to
display the name of each employer, and when processing the form, we’ll
use the ID to retrieve the employer from the data layer. Using the ID of
an employer is the only way to uniquely identify which employer has been
selected in the form, outside the cozy confines of our Java application.

In the ``JobForm`` constructor, we initialize the list of ``Employer``
objects. Initializing the other lists is up to you.

For tasks #3-5, you’ll need to mimic the code that’s in place for
``employerId`` and the ``employers`` list for the other job field types.

Once you have that stuff in place, you’ll be ready to process the form
in task #6. Validate the form in the ``add`` handler of
``JobController``, and if it’s valid, create a new ``Job`` object and
add it to the data layer by calling ``jobData.add(newJob)``.

To create the new job, you’ll need to find the pre-existing objects for
all fields other than ``name`` (``employer``, ``location``, etc). Do
this using the methods discussed above. Refer to the constructor in
``Job`` to make sure you list the objects in the correct order when
calling it.

Once you’ve created the new job, redirect to the single job display page
that you created above. If the ``jobForm`` model object fails
validation, display the form again.

Once you’ve knocked that out, you’ll be able to create new jobs in the
system via the application interface! Note that these job objects won’t
survive an application restart, because they live only within our
in-progress application’s temporary data storage system. (This is one
difference between how your app will behave compared with our demo app.
If you add a new job to our demo app, it will persist.)

Sanity Check
-------------

Before submitting, make sure that the following are true of your
application:

#. You can create a new job from ``/job/add`` by entering the name of a
   job, and selecting employer, location, skill, and position type
   values from dropdown selects.
#. If you leave off the name of a job, you are presented with the form
   again, and a message describing the error is presented on the page.
#. Upon creating a new job, you are sent to a screen displaying the data
   for only the new job. The URL for this new job is of the form
   ``/job?id=X`` where ``X`` is the numeric ID of the new job.
#. When searching and listing data, your new job shows up when
   appropriate. For example, you can see the job when searching for it
   by employer, or by its location, skill, or position type.

Refer to the `demo app <https://techjobs-oo.cfapps.io/>`__ if you’re not
sure how thing are supposed to work.

How to Submit
--------------

To turn in your assignment and get credit, follow the
:ref:`submission instructions <how-to-submit-work>`.
